III. Prior arrival at load port 
Operator
1. Calculate Optimal bunkering program taking into account Weather conditions and Seca areas on the route, port consumption.
2. Request and check Master's Pre stowage plan. If needed discuss to minimize:
fresh water, unpumpable ballast (as per last draft survey), constant and maximize cargo intake.
3. Update cash flow 2 times a week. On ________ and _______.
4. Check if it is reasonable to sail at ECO or full speed due to lay can, congestion. _________
Master 
1. Check with Master your bunker plan figures. Discuss ways to increase the max intake if possible. 
2. Request Pre Stowage plan & give full cargo, bunker, load port, discharge port details & restrictions.
3. Timely in advance give Master particular LP NOR instructions for your voyage. 
Charterers 
1. Agreed pre-stow plan with maximum intake to be passed timely to Charterers for info / approval with Company «N» standard remark (whatever appropriate).
2. Daily eta notices to be tendered to all required parties as per recap/cp/Voyage charterers' request. 
Agents 
1. Check thoroughly PDA for compliance with official rates/tariffs/reasonable sense. Minimize agency fee.
2. Remove all non compulsory items. Minimize port /anchorage stay basis best case scenario.
3. Arrange payment of Agreed PDA 3 working days prior arrival. Bank details to be verified with agents verbally prior payment.
4. Arrange payment of Agreed PDA for Canals passage 2 working days prior arrival (if required) Bank details to be verified with agents verbally prior payment. 
5. Check load, discharge, bunker port details & restrictions.
(Is there freight Tax? If yes, appoint agents via Orca.)
6. Nominate loading port agents and ask for daily berthing schedule updates.
7. Check cargo details (SF, Rate of loading, Shipper's Declaration, Readiness, Shipping orders availability).
8. If berthing is scheduled not on arrival, get a written reply from agents with reason for delay.
9. Check how cargo quantity in OBL to be ascertained: Draft survey or Shore scale figures.
10. Check who is to sign OBL Master or Agents? Obtain, check draft Mater receipt (if agents' to sign OBL) & OBL.
11. Check the Towage Company at the load port.
Surveyor 
1. Nominate surveyors in accordance with requirements of each particular cargo shipment / special case. 
2. Inform Master/agents about surveyors nominated. 

IV. Load port 
Operator
1. Check the performance report from the routing company for the ballast leg . Insert speed claim in next hire SOA if required.
2. Monitor daily working reports from Master and agents and ensure that loading is going smoothly as per agreed loading sequence. Check vessel's daily consumption to be in accordance with CP description.
3. Update cash flow 2 times a week.
4. Check if it is reasonable to sail at ECO speed due to lay can or congestion.
Master
1. If agents should sign OBL, give or agree with Master two days prior loading completion the Letter of Authorization format to sign OBL on Masters' behalf by the agents. Following remark is the MUST:
"No OBL to be issued without prior written approval of the draft by Company «N» International Ltd." 
Agents
1. If OBL to be marked "Freight prepaid" - give instructions to agents not to release a full set of Issued OBLs to any party until this office written instruction is received. 
2. Check draft SOF two working days prior loading completion. Ensure that NOR is marked "Accepted as per relevant Charter Party terms",  all shore delays are properly marked; berthing delays are duly mentioned by agents or Master (in which case give separate instructions to him in advance) ; weather delay timings are verified by log book records / info from protective agents / surveyors / previous vessel's SOFs. 
Routing company
1. Nominate routing company for the laden leg.
V. Prior arrival Discharge port
Operator
1. Request and check middle voyage performance report from routing company if required prior next hire payment.
2. Update cash flow 2 times a week. 
Owners
1. Agree with owners on the off-hire surveyor company and cost share.
2. Tender timely estimated redelivery notices to owners as per agreed CP/Recap terms.
Master
1. Give to Master DP agents' details immediately once available with instruction abt daily eta notices to agents cc to our office.
2. Timely in advance give Master particular DP NOR instructions for your voyage.
Charterers
1. Prepare initial freight invoice in accordance with signed Mates receipt or OBL (whatever available) and Voyage Recap + CP terms same day after sailing from Load port. 
2. Check if dispatch should be deducted from freight.
3. After verified by the Authorized person send Initial Freight Invoice to Voyage Charterers along with cargo documents from load port.
4. Ask for final Discharge port and Agents' details if not stated in recap after sailing load port. Keep asking until received.
5. Provide Charterers in advance with draft LOI for cargo delivery/discharge w/o OBL. Find out 7 working days prior arrival at DP if OBL should be available prior vessel's arrival or not. If not Press Voyage charterers to prepare Timely LOI enabling to agree it beforehand with Owners. There might be many parties in both Voyage and Time Charter CP chains so LOI arrangement the sooner the better.
6. Daily ETA notices to be tendered to all required parties as per recap/cp/Voyage charterers' request.
7. Ensure that Initial Freight is collected as per Company «N»'s Invoice within CP agreed time bar.

Agents
1. Check thoroughly PDA for compliance with official rates/tariffs/reasonable sense. Minimize agency fee. Remove all non compulsory items. Minimize port /anchorage stay basis best case scenario.
Arrange payment of Agreed PDA 3 working days prior arrival. Bank details to be verified with agents verbally prior payment.
2. Check OBLs readiness
Arrange payment of Agreed PDA for Canals passage 2 working days prior arrival (if required) Bank details to be verified with agents verbally prior payment.
Nominate discharge port agents immediately once available and ask for daily berthing schedule updates. Check in advance if duly endorsed OBL is going to be available at discharge port prior vessel's arrival.
If berthing is scheduled not on arrival get written reply from agents with reason of delay
Check for the towage company at the discharge port.
Check Owners expenses at load port.
Surveyor
1. Nominate surveyors in accordance with requirements of each particular cargo shipment / special case and for on-hire bunker and condition survey.
2. Inform Master/agents about surveyors nominated.
VI. Discharge port 
Operator
1. Check performance report from routing company for laden leg . Insert speed claim in next hire soa if required. Monitor daily working reports from Master and agents and ensure that discharge is going smoothly as per agreed discharge sequence.
2. Update cash flow 2 times a week. 
Owners
1. Tender estimated and actual redelivery notice to owners as per agreed CP/Recap terms.
Agents
Check draft SOF two working days prior discharge completion.
Ensure that NOR is marked "Accepted as per relevant Charter Party terms",
all shore delays are properly marked;
berthing delays are duly mentioned by agents or Master (in which case give separate instructions to him in advance) ; weather delay timings are verified by log book records / info from protective agents / surveyors / previous vessel's SOFs. Monitor for rate of discharge, delays.
Check Owners expenses at discharge port.
VII. After redelivery 
Operator
1. Within one working day after sailing from discharge port Calculate laytime for Load and Discharge ports.
2. Prepare VSOA. Verify calculations / VSOA with an Authorized person in Company «N».
3. Update cash flow 2 times a week. 
Owners
1. Prepare Pre-final hire SOA (with Owners' Expenses deducted) and Remit balance due to owners.
Charterers
1. Send Voyage statement of accounts to Voyage charterers supported by L/T calculations and discharge port documents latest within 7 days after completion of voyage cc to claims department.
2. Ensure that the final balance due to Company «N» as per VSOA issued is collected as per CP agreed time bar.
Broker
1. Arrange payment of commission for both brokers.